This is New York and [music] this is the
New York City subway. 600 m of track,
over 400 stations, and a daily [music]
wrership of more than 3 million people.
It's one of the most impressive transit
systems [music] in the world. But once
upon a time, it could have looked
completely different.
trams [music] crossing the entire city.
Elevated trains 30 ft in the air.
[music] Plans to double the size of the
entire subway with lines running from
Manhattan to Staten Island.
This is the [music] story of the plans
for the city's transit that almost but
never quite happened. [music] stopped in
their tracks, defeated in a decadesl
long battle for the New York City
subway.
In the [music] early 1800s, the first
permanent mass transit was pulled by
horses [music] along steel rails in the
street. But the horse cars had problems.
Animals got tired. [music] They were
unreliable. They couldn't unionize, but
somehow you still had to feed [music]
them. They were an outdated technology.
The city needed a replacement. [music]
Between 1825 and 1899, the patent office
received a total of 125 plans for
elevated transit systems. The first plan
was the arcade railway. Keep the horses,
[music]
but elevate them to a platform above the
street while trains ran below.
John Randall Jr.,
>> [music]
>> a three-mile elevated track along
Broadway.
James Sweat, a steam powered locomotive
[music]
dangling passenger cars below.
There was also [music] Rufus Gilbert, an
elevated train powered by steam
pneumatics that launched cars from
station [music] to station.
Almost all were for Broadway, the city's
most congested street. But there [music]
was a problem. No one knew whether an
elevated train would raise property
values or lower them. So Broadway
shopkeepers blocked [music] any plan
that could affect their property values.
Only a master politician [music] could
truly tackle the congestion.
Charles Harvey was the chief engineer on
a successful project to link Lake
Superior [music]
and Lake Huron.
That gave him powerful political allies.
Harvey also saw elevated transit as the
solution to New [music] York's
congestion. But unlike the other
inventors, Harvey stayed away from the
landowners on Broadway.
Instead, he wanted to build an elevated
train line on Greenwich Street and 9th
Avenue. Far enough away to avoid the
conflict, but close enough to make a
difference. With his own money, he built
a test track. If his plan failed, he'd
tear it down.
In 1867, he piloted a single car down a
half mile track, reaching a top speed of
10 mph. Impressive,
but it [music] was pulled by a cable and
cables break. He had enough time to fix
it, but competitors [music] were coming.
In 1863, after the first underground
transit system in the world opened in
London, Alfred Eli Beach [music] was
convinced the solution to traffic
congestion wasn't above the street, it
was under it. An engineer, his idea was
to use compressed air propelled by a
massive steam powered [music] fan to
push cars through a cylindrical tube.
But he had to build it in secret.
New York was under the grip of the
corrupt Ham Hall and its boss.
Boss Tweed, a businessman who used his
political power [music] to enrich
himself and his associates. Tweed had
deep ties to the horse [music] car
companies. Beachch tried to get official
permission to build a subway. Boss Tweed
blocked him at [music] every turn. So he
hatched a plan. Instead of a subway, he
asked for permission to build a
pneumatic mail tube under Broadway. He
leased a department store building
[music] and from there he dug a tunnel
312 ft long and 8 ft high. He used an
innovative tunneling shield method to
avoid attracting attention at the
surface. If the street pavement cracked,
it was over. They worked [music] at
night with hand tools. Materials were
carted into the building using side
streets. And finally in 1870, he
revealed [music] his beach pneumatic
transit project, a fully functional
subway. It was a success. So Beachch
proposed to extend it another 5 mi to
Central Park.
The permit [music] was blocked again.
Tweed had just gotten a charter for his
own New York railway company and he had
plans [music] to build his own elevated
train in Manhattan.
It was now underground versus
overground.
Beach threatened his monopoly, but so
did Harvey.
Harvey's railroad on Manhattan's west
side was starting to take off. He fixed
some of the technical setbacks and his
investors reorganized [music] his
company into the New York Elevated
Railway Company.
Instead of [music] cables, the lines
were switched to steam powered
locomotives.
And it worked. Boss Tweed went [music]
to the state legislature with a bill to
declare Harvey's train a public
nuisance, seeking permission to tear it
down. But Harvey had a card [music] in
his favor. Powerful political allies.
With their help, [music] he managed to
defeat Tweed's bill. In the same year,
Tweed was brought down by a cartoonist
named [music] Thomas Nast.
The cartoons prompted investigations
that uncovered [music] years of
embezzlement, bribes, nepotism, and
rigged elections. He was convicted
[music] of 102 separate crimes and
sentenced to 12 years in prison. With
Tweed out of the picture, it was now a
race between Harvey's elevated [music]
train and beaches subway. The fight of
the century. Who was going to win?
Underground subway or elevated steam
engine? Financial crisis. [music]
Investors were nervous. Harvey's 9th
Avenue Ltrain had already proven the
concept of elevated transit. Beach's
[music] pneumatic subway was still
somewhat of an experiment.
Investors stopped backing it. By the
late 1800s, the Elrains defeated the
subway [music] and were going to
transform the city. Private rail
companies built several elevated train
lines in Manhattan [music] to areas that
were previously nothing more than
farmland. It allowed people [music] to
live further away but still benefit from
the city. In only 5 years, hundreds of
blocks of elevated track [music] were
built. Harlem, once a rural area with
farms and country estates, was filled
with rowouses. In the Bronx, the Third
Avenue Led
increase in only 20 years.
But the L trains [music] weren't
perfect.
They were gigantic steam engines in the
air. They pumped out toxic smoke,
[music]
blocked out the sun, and were incredibly
noisy. The tracks turned into
boundaries. [music] It was dangerous to
walk under them at night because of the
shady people who hung there. Hey, want
to try out some remote access software?
If you haven't heard of it, I use it all
the time. I was in New York recently,
which is actually when I thought of
making this video, but I didn't bring my
laptop because I thought, you know what,
this is it. I can finally rely on other
people to keep this ship running. But
that turned out to [music] be complete
mistake. So I had to use any desk to get
access to my home PC from my phone
[music] and then kick off the project.
It allows me to stay really flexible so
I don't feel stressed about not having
access to all my files or hopping onto
Blender. And I know that my data is
secure [music] thanks to their
militarygrade encryption. If you're an
entrepreneur or often on the move or
have a system where you're clearly the
bottleneck, Anyesk [music] is definitely
something to try out. Try now for free
at any.com/ho. [music]
But by the time all elevated lines were
united under the Manhattan Railway
Company in 1880, they were already
overwhelmed by passenger demand, and the
population continued to explode. It
nearly tripled between 1880 and 1905. By
1910, Manhattan alone reached a peak
population of 2.3 million people. Demand
for commuter rail soared. Instead of
vertical growth, real estate developers
wanted horizontal expansion enabled by
cheap mass transit. It was already a
total revolution in how people lived,
but another one was coming. In 1882,
Thomas Edison opened the Pearl Street
Power Station in lower Manhattan. One of
the first centralized electrical grids
in the world. Brooklyn got its first
electric street car in 1890, running
from Park Circle to Coney Island. Then
they looked under the elevated train
lines and they saw the horse cars and
they were like, "What are you still
doing here?" The trolleys were twice as
fast, more reliable, and more efficient.
The web of horse car lines electrified
and expanded [music] across the city.
But while street cars were good for
local transit, they were still too slow
for long distances. But they prove the
viability of electric railway vehicles.
And if they worked for trolleys, they
[music] could work for trains. The Lines
were converted to electricity. No more
toxic smoke. But without smoke, suddenly
it was much easier to justify building
them underground.
In 1898, New York's five burrows
consolidated.
New York City's administrative area
increased to 13 times its size. It
became a global mega city, the second
largest in the world.
London had an electric underground
system. By 1890, Paris unveiled its
metro at the 1900 Exposition. New York,
now supposedly up there with the big
dogs, was behind. Once the five burrows
were brought under one city government,
the construction of an integrated
regional transit network was justified.
Construction on the subway began in
1900, and in just 4 years, 9 mi of track
and 28 stops were completed. The
Manhattan mainline was publicly funded
but privately operated by the Inter
Rapid Transit Company or IRT. It ran
from city hall to Harlem all for just 5.
But even before the first line was
finished, people were demanding
expansions. [music]
The initial planning for subway
expansion was overseen by the board of
rapid transit railroad commissioners. In
1902, they asked chief engineer William
Barkley Parsons to develop a general and
far-reaching system of rapid transit
covering the whole city of New York and
all its five burrows. His vision
included expansions into Brooklyn, the
Bronx, and Queens. In [music] Manhattan,
they planned multiple lines on the east
side. By the time Parsons published his
plan in 1906, the first subway line was
already at capacity. By 1908, the subway
averaged 800,000 passengers a day. The
Rapid Transit Commission was dissolved.
From then on, transit was overseen by
the state public service commission. No
one thought the PSC could juggle both
subway operation and all other public
utilities.
But the PSC wanted to prove them wrong.
They came up with the tribal plan, which
had three main routes. It stretched from
the tip of Manhattan to the Bronx. A
subway that ran under 4th Avenue in
Brooklyn. lines branched off and ran to
Bay Ridge, Coney Island, and other
Brooklyn neighborhoods.
The tribal plan was important. Most of
it was built, but then expansion
stagnated. There were philosophical
differences between New York's mayor and
the PSC. Mayor Gainner wanted to extend
existing [music] lines. PSC wanted a new
independent system. The private railroad
companies stagnated with no political
direction and no competition. The IRT
and BRT had no incentive to expand their
subway systems.
That was until an outsider, William
Gibbs, wanted to link the tribal routes
with his own railroad [music] system.
With a new competition, the IRT and BRT
were prompted to expand again. They
signed a deal, the dual contracts,
[music]
one with the IRT and one with the BRT,
which led to a wave of subway expansion.
The city built new subways and new
elevated lines as well as rehabilitated
existing lines. Then they leased them to
the private companies for operation.
Cost was shared between the city and
companies.
The single expansion under the dual
contracts built majority of the subway
system used today. Despite the
successful expansion of the subway, the
PSC was still seen as too cumbersome and
slow.
It was also tasked with the construction
of rapid transit and regulating all
other public utility corporations within
the city. So in 1919, Alfred E. Smith,
the governor of New York, argued that
these functions had to be separate. He
signed legislation to take control of
public transit away [music] from the
PSC. His new transit construction
commissioner appointed a man named
Daniel Lawrence Turner as chief
engineer. Turner wanted to spread out
the city's population across all five
burrows. In 1920, he released his
ambitious comprehensive plan. Over 830 m
of new routes, more than double the
systems existing mileage and even more
than what's there today. All built
within 25 years.
But then politics got in the way again.
The mayor, John F. Highland, was adamant
that the city should own the transit
system, not the state and not private
companies.
He was once fired from the BRT for
driving a train at a reckless speed
around a curve. So, he held a
deep-seated grudge against the privately
operated subway companies. He wanted to
push the IRT and BRT out of business. He
withheld funds for new lines, denied
building permits, and refused to raise
the 5-cent fair, hoping to cut off their
revenue. His master plan to destroy the
private rail companies was a public
subway expansion designed to directly
out compete them. It was ambitious. He
would build over 100 miles of new lines
and take over another hundred from
private companies, all completed within
3 years.
But he had an enemy,
the state transit commission. They
laughed at his plan and called it
ridiculous.
They asked Turner to draft a proposal to
build rapid transit in the suburbs and
relieve subway overcrowding.
>> [music]
>> The core of their plan centered on two
loop lines in lower and midtown
Manhattan.
The first loop envisioned connections
between the Long Island Railroad in
lower and midtown Manhattan. A second
larger loop aimed to establish
connections to New Jersey commuter
lines. Stations within the city would
also provide additional rapid transit
service to local riders.
But Mayor Highland wasn't one to back
off.
The city took back control of transit
oversight and appointed John Delaney as
chairman of the new city board of
transportation.
By the end of the year, he put forth the
independent city-owned plan. They would
build or extend subway routes by 100
miles. 12 in Manhattan, 19 in the Bronx,
17 in Brooklyn, and 52 in Queens. It
would run to every burrow except Staten
Island. But that didn't [music] really
matter. Their aim was to provide subway
service within a half a mile of
everyone's home. The extravagant plan
was proposed in 1929, but after the
stock market crash, the full plan would
never be built. During the Great
Depression, the city's money ran out.
Mayor LaGuardia united the IRT and BRT
into a unified city-run system to save
money. Even though there were no funds,
the city kept planning for future
expansions.
>> One good government. In 1939, Delaney
unveiled another plan. It included a
second avenue subway running from lower
Manhattan into the Bronx. In the Bronx,
there would be three main expansions,
and Queens, the Queens Boulevard, and
Van White Boulevard lines would be
extended. Multiple connections would
also be established in Brooklyn. But
these plans never moved forward either.
World War II diverted resources, and so
did a new player. [music]
Robert Moses came to power in the 1930s.
His massive highway projects were seen
as the future. Trolleys, Lrains, and
subways were the past. He advocated for
the demolition of old elevated lines in
Manhattan. They were all demolished. All
the street car tracks were ripped out to
make room for cars.
Robert Moses was exceptionally good at
achieving his own vision. Transit
leadership was not. They were unable to
raise the 5-cent subway fair until 1948,
which meant they had no funding for
transit projects. When the city issued
bonds in 1951, the revenue was diverted
from new line construction to maintain
and modernize the existing system.
Meanwhile, Robert Moses diverted funds
earmarked for a subway extension in the
Bronx to build his Bell [music] Parkway
project, and he snapped up rights of way
reserve for rapid transit to build a
highway in the Bronx. By the end of his
50-year reign, the city operated subway
was severely underfunded. It had a
backlog of deferred maintenance and was
unable to complete plans for expansion.
The subways were taken from city control
and given [music] to the state. The new
MTA launched an ambitious proposal
called the program for action. But just
like the Great Depression and World War
II halted plans before, another economic
crash in the 1970s put a stop to this
one, too. The subway [music] was
transferred to the MTA, but it continued
to decline. During the city's fiscal
crisis in the 70s, the subways turned
[music] into a powerful visual metaphor.
By the '90s, the economy and the subway
were recovering. But decades of
underfunding have taken their toll.
More than a 100 years later, [music] the
New York City subway still has not
achieved the grand designs of Turner and
Delaney. And unless it can get cheaper
to build, it never will. One of the
biggest obstacles of making YouTube
videos with Blender animations like this
one are the render times. Your GPU gets
tied up for hours, sometimes days, just
to process every single frame. Super
Luminal allows you to transfer your
Blender project files to our render
[music] farm, where multiple GPUs will
tackle your render at the same time.
There's no way to produce Blender
animations as intuitively, fast, and
affordably as with Super Luminal. The
quick and easy submission process and
the live web previews ensure you don't
have to think about rendering anymore.
There's nobody on our team who uses
their own GPUs to render our
compositions anymore. The opportunity
cost of not using Super Luminal is way
more expensive than using the render
farm. Get $10 in credits for free with
your first purchase by going to
sue.loo/subways
or by using the referral code hoo.